Welcome back to Walking in His Footsteps, the
podcast where we explore how Jesus's life and
teachings can guide us through life's highs and
lows.
I'm Emma Thompson, your host, and today we're
tackling something so many of us face, anxiety
and depression.
In a world that's always on with social
media, work stress, and constant news, it can
feel overwhelming.
How can Jesus's words and example help us
find peace?
I'm joined again by Dr. Michael Carter, biblical
scholar and at St. Mary's University.
Dr. Carter, thanks for being back.
Emma, it's great to be here.
This is such an important topic, and I'm
glad we're diving into it with Jesus's wisdom
as our guide.
Me too.
I'm really looking forward to this deep dive.
You know, when we talk about peace in
this restless world, especially thinking about anxiety and
depression, it makes you wonder, did Jesus or
the Bible generally actually speak to these kinds
of deep emotional struggles, even if they didn't
use, well, our exact clinical words for them?
I mean, for so many people today, burnout,
that constant low level worry you get from
scrolling, feeling a bit lost, it's almost just
background noise now.
That's a really vital question to start with.
And what's fascinating is that while you're right,
the Bible doesn't use terms like clinical depression
or generalised anxiety disorder.
It absolutely speaks directly, powerfully to the core
human experiences behind those labels.
Think about the world Jesus lived in.
I mean, Roman occupation, crushing poverty for many,
real instability, people feeling powerless.
He knew the weight people carried.
He saw it every day.
Right.
It wasn't exactly a stress-free time.
Not at all.
So if we think about anxiety first, you
look at the Sermon on the Mount, Matthew
chapter six, Jesus says something like, don't worry
about your life, what you'll eat or drink
or your body, what you'll wear.
He points to the birds they don't sow
or reap, but God feeds them.
Aren't you much more valuable?
He asks.
Now for people living hand to mouth worrying
about the next meal, that wasn't just a
nice thought.
It was revolutionary.
Huge shift in perspective.
Exactly.
There was a call to fundamentally shift their
focus from scarcity and fear to, well, a
deep trust in God's provision.
That hits modern anxiety right where it lives,
that gnawing fear about the future.
And what about those deeper feelings, the ones
closer to what we'd call depression, that heaviness?
Well, the Psalms are just filled with that
kind of raw, honest emotion.
Think about Psalm 42, verse 11, why my
soul are you downcast?
Why so disturbed within me?
It's not just a bad mood, that's deep
anguish, a soul feeling truly heavy, disturbed.
But what's key is the next line, put
your hope in God.
The Bible doesn't shy away from showing us
people feeling that depth of despair, but it
almost always points towards hope, towards trust, even
from the depths.
It validates the feeling and offers a way
forward.
Okay.
So the acknowledgement is there, the direction towards
hope is there, but practically speaking, when you're
really spiralling, when anxiety has its grip or
that depressive fog feels total, just hearing don't
worry or hope in God can feel, well,
almost impossible sometimes.
How do these teachings become something tangible, like
an anchor you can actually hold onto in
that moment?
That's the core challenge, isn't it?
And it's so important to say, Jesus' words
aren't meant as a magic spell.
It's not an instant fix.
What they offer is a framework.
A foundation, a truth to cling to when
everything else feels like it's shaking.
Jesus was incredibly realistic about life.
John 16.33, he tells his followers straight
up, in this world, you will have trouble,
no sugarcoating.
Right.
He didn't promise easy.
No, but then he immediately follows with, but
take heart, I have overcome the world.
So it's this pairing, acknowledging the real pain,
the real trouble, but anchoring it in a
greater hope, a bigger victory.
Sometimes just naming the pain as the first
step, right?
Not pretending it isn't there.
So acknowledging it, then what?
Then engaging practically.
Philippians 4.6-7 gives such clear steps.
Do not be anxious about anything.
Okay, easier said than done, but then it
says how?
But in every situation, by prayer and petition,
with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.
With thanksgiving, that part always strikes me.
It's crucial, isn't it?
It's not just bringing your worry list.
It's actively looking for, naming things to be
grateful for, even small things right in the
midst of the anxiety.
It reframes things.
It shifts your focus.
And the peace of God, it continues, which
transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and
your minds.
That's the promise tied to that practise.
Have you seen that work for people in
a real life situation?
Oh, definitely.
I knew someone, let's call her Rachel, who
had terrible anxiety attacks, really debilitating.
She found something that helped her ground herself.
She got a little notebook, just a small
physical thing.
She wrote out verses like that one from
Philippians.
When she felt the panic rising, she'd physically
pull out the notebook, read the words slowly,
breathe deeply, deliberately.
And then she'd actually speak her requests to
God, just like the verse says, trying to
also voice things she was thankful for.
A physical anchor.
Exactly.
Wasn't an overnight cure, not at all.
But she described it as her lifeline.
It gave her something solid to hold onto,
connecting her to God's peace when her own
mind felt chaotic.
It was that intentional act of engaging.
That makes so much sense, making it tangible.
Let's shift a bit to that other feeling
we mentioned, that heaviness, the stuck-in-a
-fog feeling of depression.
How does Jesus' own life or teachings speak
into that?
That's such a profound struggle.
And I think one of the most powerful
things is seeing Jesus' own experience of deep
sorrow.
Think about the Garden of Gethsemane, right before
his crucifixion, Matthew 26.38. He tells his
closest friends, my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow
to the point of death.
Wow.
To the point of death.
That's not just sadness.
That's crushing agony.
It felt, to him, life-threatening.
But what did he do?
He prayed, but he also asked his friends
to start with him.
Exactly.
He turned to God, yes, poured out his
heart.
But he also reached out for human connection.
He didn't isolate himself in that immense pain.
He asked them to watch with him, to
be present.
That's a powerful model, because the instinct is
often to pull away when you feel like
that.
It really is.
And it highlights how central community was for
Jesus.
He didn't just teach, he built a community,
a circle of support, people who shared life
together, the good and the bad.
So for someone battling depression, that might mean
finding that courage to reach out to a
friend, family, maybe a pastor or counsellor, crucially,
maybe a mental health professional, someone to just
listen, to be there.
It connects to that idea of not carrying
it alone.
Precisely.
I think of another person, James.
He lost his job and just spiralled into
a really dark place, felt worthless, totally alone.
It took a lot.
But eventually, he went along to a small
group from his church and just sharing a
bit of his struggle over coffee, having people
listen without judgement, pray with him.
He said it was like the fog slowly
started to lift.
Community in action.
Yes.
It wasn't instant, but that consistent loving presence
made a huge difference.
It brings to life that invitation from Jesus
in Matthew 11.28. Come to me, all
you who are weary and burdened, and I
will give you rest.
James found that rest not just in private
prayer, but through people being the hands and
feet of Jesus, offering that compassion.
It's often both God and people working together.
That interplay is so important.
Okay, let's bring this right up to today.
The modern world throws so much at us,
the 24-7 news, social media constantly showing
curated perfection, this pressure to compare.
It feels designed to fuel anxiety and maybe
even depression.
How can Jesus' teachings help us navigate this
specific kind of noise?
That noise is very real, isn't it?
A relentless pressure.
And while obviously, no smartphones in Jesus' time,
his world wasn't quiet either.
Think of the crowds, the political tension, the
constant demands.
True.
Different noise, but still noise.
Exactly.
And what did Jesus consistently model?
Withdrawal, intentional withdrawal.
Luke 5.1c says, Jesus often withdrew to
lonely places and prayed.
Often, not just once in a while.
Right.
It was a regular practise.
For us, that speaks directly to the need
to deliberately unplug.
Maybe it's an hour before bed with no
screens.
Maybe it's choosing a time for quiet reflection,
prayer, journaling, creating intentional pockets of silence to
counter the constant external buzz.
Like building little sanctuaries in our day.
Precisely.
And the other piece, especially with social media,
is where we get our sense of identity,
our worth.
Social media often pushes us towards comparison, right?
Measuring ourselves by likes, followers, how perfect our
life looks online.
Definitely.
It's a trap.
It is.
And Jesus offers a completely different foundation.
In John 15.14, he says something remarkable
to his disciples.
I no longer call you servants.
Instead, I have called you friends.
Friends, not just followers.
Friends, intimate companions.
Our value, our identity isn't based on performance
or popularity.
It's based on being known and loved by
God.
That's a radical shift from the world's metrics.
I remember Mia, a young woman really struggling
with that comparison trap online, feeling inadequate, anxious
all the time.
Her strategy wasn't to ditch social media entirely,
but she started a new habit.
Every morning, before she looked at her phone,
she'd read a chapter from one of the
Gospels.
Oh, interesting.
Setting the tone first.
Exactly.
It was her way of reminding herself, first
thing, who she was in God's eyes, not
in the eyes of her feed.
She said it gave her a steadier foundation
for the whole day, rooted in God's love,
not shifting online approval.
That's such a practical way to re-anchor
yourself.
It really highlights finding that timeless value over
fleeting validation.
Okay, so for someone listening right now, maybe
they feel really alone in their struggle, maybe
hopeless.
It's exhausted.
What do you think Jesus's core message to
them would be right here, right now?
Oh, I think first and foremost, it would
be compassion, deep compassion.
He always saw the hurting, the ones on
the margins.
His heart would absolutely go out to them.
And he'd want them to hear, truly hear
and take in his words from John 10
.10, I have come that they may have
life and have it to the full or
abundantly.
To the full, not just scraping by.
Exactly.
He'd want them to know deep down that
they are seen, that God loves them right
where they are, unconditionally, and that God desires
their flourishing, their wholeness, not just survival.
So what's a first step?
If someone feels that way, what's one small
thing they could do?
Maybe just one small manageable step.
Perhaps it's taking the huge leap of courage
to tell one trusted person how they're really
feeling.
A friend, family member, a pastor, a therapist,
just breaking the isolation.
Yeah, saying it out loud.
Or it might be praying the simplest, most
honest prayer, even just Jesus help me, that's
enough.
Or maybe quietly reading Psalm 23, the Lord
is my shepherd.
Even though I walk through the darkest valley,
I will fear no evil for you are
with me.
Just letting that truth of God's presence soak
in, knowing you're not alone, even in the
valley.
That image is so powerful, not instantly lifting
you out, but being with you right there
in the darkness, that changes everything.
If you were to leave us with just
one final thought, one core takeaway about finding
peace amid anxiety or depression through Jesus's teachings,
what would it be?
I think it would be this, lean into
his promise of presence.
Really lean into it.
He knows, he understands the struggle, the fear,
the pain.
And he gave us that incredible unwavering promise
in Matthew 28, right at the very end.
Surely I am with you always to the
very end of the age, always.
So whether your journey towards peace involves more
prayer or digging into scripture or finding that
vital support in community or taking an incredibly
brave step of seeking professional help, which is
so important, know this, Jesus is walking with
you every single step.
You really, truly don't have to carry it
all by yourself.
Let his love, let his peace be your
strength.
Let it be your anchor.
Wow.
That's a lifeline, a truly powerful message to
carry with us.
Dr. Michael Carter, thank you so much for
sharing such profound wisdom and genuine hope with
us today.
Listeners, if anything we discussed resonated with you,
if you found a glimmer of hope or
practical step, please share this deep dive with
someone who might need to hear it.
And remember, you are not alone in your
struggles.
Please don't hesitate to reach out for support.
Join us next time as we continue to
explore more of Jesus's timeless teachings and how
they light our path in our modern world.
Until then, keep walking in his footsteps.